# Frequently Asked Questions for Upgrading to the Latest AMET Version

## Table of Contents:
* [Do I need to update from v1.4 to v1.5?](#why_update_v14_v15)
* [What do I need to do to update from v1.4 to v1.5?](#update_v14_v15)
* [What differences should I expect with v1.5 compared to v1.4?](#diff_v14_v15)
* [Do I need to update from v1.4 to v1.5?](#why_update_v14_v15)
* [Additional FAQ](#additional_faq)
* [Technical support for AMET](#tech_support)

<a id=why_update_v14_v15></a>
## Do I need to update from v1.4 to v1.5?
AMETv1.5 is an incremental update from version 1.4. It includes important enhancements and new analysis scripts. **If a user intend to use the latest available AMET-AQ observation files, then upgrading to AMETv1.5 is required. Likelwise, if upgrading to AMETv1.5, a user must update to the latest version of the AMET-AQ observation files. Updating both the AMET version and AMET-AQ observation files together will insure all the AQ species matching between CMAQ and the obervations is done correctly.**
#### CMAQv5.3 System Updates
* Updated instrumented models: Previously, the Sulfur Tracking Model (STM) and the Integrated Source Apportionment Method (ISAM) were at least one version behind the base model. As of CMAQv5.3, these instrumented models are now compile-time options available with the current base version of the model. Additionally, improvements in computational efficiency of these instrumented techniques have led to substantially faster run times to support their practical applications.
* The new DESID emissions interface allows for substantial flexibility in the way emissions are mapped, scaled, and checked for quality and can greatly simplify the task of assessing air quality improvements resulting from emission changes.
* Incorporated updates (new data sources, updated vertical coordinate system) to CMAQ and the Meteorology-Chemistry Interface Processor (MCIPv5.0) to increase scientific consistency between the atmospheric dynamics and chemistry calculations.
#### New Features and Processes in v5.3
* Updated marine chemistry to represent impacts of (1) halogen chemistry on ozone depletion and sulfate formation and (2) dimethyl sulfide on aerosol sulfate.
* Expanded the representation of secondary pollutant formation in clouds (AQCHEM-KMT2).
* Updated aerosol module (AERO7) that explicitly tracks 84 particulate species.
* Updated pathways for secondary organic aerosol formation from biogenic VOCs.
* Harmonized treatment of water uptake to aerosol organic phase to improve representation of aerosol chemistry, mixing state, and optical properties.
* Improved the representation of bi-directional exchange of ammonia at the surface 
* Improved representation of O<sub>3</sub> dry deposition to snow.
* Incorporated a new deposition module – the Surface Tiled Aerosol and Gaseous Exchange (STAGE) model – to estimate land-use specific deposition.
#### Further information on v5.3
* [CMAQv5.3 Fact Sheet](https://www.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2018-10/documents/cmaq_factsheet_.pdf)
* February 27, 2019 webinar: Recent Enhancements to the CMAQ Modeling System - [Download Slides](https://www.epa.gov/research-states/recent-enhancements-cmaq-modeling-system-webinar-archive)
* October 8, 2019 webinar hosted by CMAS: Enhanced Capabilities to Analyze Emissions Scenarios in CMAQv5.3 - [Download slides](https://www.cmascenter.org/resources/pres_files/CMAQv5.3_CMAS_Webinar_Analyzing_Emissions_Scenarios_20191008.pptx) | [Download/Watch recording](https://www.cmascenter.org/resources/pres_files/GMT20191008-175951_CMAQv5-3--_1600x900.mp4)

<a id=diff_v14_v15></a>
## What differences should I expect with v1.5 compared to v1.4?
The following summary is based on our incremental testing of the science updates in CMAQv5.3 using v5.3 and v5.2.1 annual 2016 simulations over the CONUS (12km horizontal grid resolution, 35 vertical layers, cb6r3_ae7_aq chemical mechanism).
### Ozone
* Large increase in wintertime O<sub>3</sub> due to reduced deposition to snow in M3Dry. As expected, primarily affects northern latitudes with snow cover. Increases in O<sub>3</sub> in winter in 2016 over the CONUS range from 1-2 ppbV as far south as VA, TN, MO, KS, and CO to 10+ ppbV over ND, SD, WI, MN and central Canada.
* Outside of winter, O<sub>3</sub> generally decreases across the CONUS primarily due to updates to the PX-LSM vegetation fraction and LAI, with significantly reduced vegetation fraction which in turn reduces O<sub>3</sub> dry deposition and increases O<sub>3</sub> ambient mixing ratios. Additional chemistry updates in the model had a small impact on O<sub>3</sub>. Decreases generally range between 1-6 ppbV, with the largest decrease in the western US, and similar magnitudes across spring, summer and fall.
* Science updates affecting O<sub>3</sub> had the overall effect of dramatically improving O<sub>3</sub> underestimation in the winter (particularly the northern latitudes), slightly increasing O<sub>3</sub> overestimation in the spring, reducing O<sub>3</sub> bias in the summer and fall in the eastern US, and increasing O<sub>3</sub> bias in the summer and fall in the western US, particularly California (except for along the coast where O<sub>3</sub> bias decreases).
* **Summary**: O<sub>3</sub> is higher (~2 ppbV on average across all sites) in the winter (December/January); and lower (~2 ppbV on average across all sites) in the spring, summer and fall.
### PM<sub>2.5</sub>
* Large increase in wintertime PM<sub>2.5</sub> in the eastern US due to increased oxidants in v5.3. This increase generally ranges between 1-4 µg m<sup>-3</sup>, with the largest increase in the upper Midwest. However, this large increase in wintertime PM<sub>2.5</sub> due to science updates in v5.3 is essentially offset here by a similar large decrease in PM<sub>2.5</sub> by removing the application of PCSOA to residential wood combustion (RWC). PCSOA was never intended to be applied to RWC, but prior to version 5.3 CMAQ was able to read only a single gridded emissions input file, so there was no way to enable PCSOA without also applying it to RWC. The new ability in CMAQv5.3 to read multiple gridded emission input files allows for separation of RWC, so that PCSOA can be implemented without being applied to RWC. This results in an overall decrease in total PM<sub>2.5</sub>, as PCSOA is intended to account for missing sources of aerosol. This decrease generally ranges between 1-4 µg m<sup>-3</sup>, with isolated areas with larger decreases.
* In addition to these changes in winter, there is a small increase in springtime, and a relatively large increase in summer and fall PM<sub>2.5</sub> in the Southeast US due to increased SOA from monoterpene oxidation. These increases are on the order of 1-2 µg m<sup>-3</sup> in spring, and generally 2-4 µg m<sup>-3</sup> in summer and fall.
* As the overall change in PM<sub>2.5</sub> in the winter was close to zero, overall model performance did not change much, with changes in mean bias between -2 to 2 µg m<sup>-3</sup>. Change in performance in the spring was also relatively small, although there was a slight overall increase in bias in the Southeast US, generally on the order of 2 µg m<sup>-3</sup> or less. Bias increased more significantly in the summer and fall in the Southeast US, with mean bias value increasing between 2-4 µg m<sup>-3</sup> (particularly in the summer). Elsewhere across the country, change in bias was generally small, with some notable isolated exceptions along the west coast.
* **Summary**: PM<sub>2.5</sub> is slightly lower (~0–0.5 µg m<sup>-3</sup> on average across all sites) in the late fall, winter and early spring; and higher (~0.5–1 µg m<sup>-3</sup> on average across all sites) in late spring, summer and early fall.

### Wet Deposition 
* Wet deposition SO<sub>4</sub> is higher in the winter and spring with CMAQv5.3 versus CMAQv5.2.1. Monthly accumulated SO<sub>4</sub> wet deposition averaged across the entire domain is underestimated throughout the year by between 10-40 kg/ha. Updates in CMAQv5.3 generally improve this underestimation by 2-10 kg/ha in the winter and spring. For the summer and fall, SO<sub>4</sub> wet deposition is very similar between CMAQv5.2.1 and CMAQv5.3. The largest improvement in performance in the winter and spring occurs in the eastern US (particularly the Northeast, Southeast and Great Lakes regions) where ambient SO<sub>4</sub> concentrations are generally the highest. Simulating with bi-directional NH<sub>3</sub> exchange (BiDi) turned on has little impact on wet deposition SO<sub>4</sub>.
* Wet deposition NO<sub>3</sub> is higher throughout the year with CMAQv5.3 versus CMAQv5.2.1. Monthly accumulated NO<sub>3</sub> wet deposition averaged across the entire domain is underestimated in the winter, spring and early summer with CMAQv5.2.1 by approximately 5-40 kg/ha. This underestimation improves with v5.3 by ~5-15 kg/ha, resulting in a smaller underestimation in the winter and spring to relatively unbiased in the early summer. In late summer and fall, wet deposition NO<sub>3</sub> with CMAQv5.2.1 is relatively unbiased, and this bias increases to approximately 4-8 kg/ha (average monthly accumulated) with CMAQv5.3. The spatial change in wet deposition NO<sub>3</sub> bias is much more heterogeneous than for SO<sub>4</sub> wet deposition, with some sites indicating a large improvement in bias, while other sites indicate an increase in bias. Overall, bias decreases at more sites than it increases in the winter and spring. The largest changes in bias again occur primarily in the eastern half of the US, with some larger values also showing up along the west coast of the US. In the summer and fall, more sites indicate an increase in wet deposition NO<sub>3</sub> bias with CMAQv5.3 than with CMAQv5.2.1. Simulating with bi-directional NH<sub>3</sub> exchange (BiDi) turned on has little impact on wet deposition NO<sub>3</sub>.
* Wet deposition NH<sub>4</sub> is slightly lower in the spring, summer and fall with CMAQv5.3 versus CMAQv5.2.1. Monthly accumulated NH<sub>4</sub> wet deposition averaged across the entire domain is underestimated throughout the year by approximately 20-50 kg/ha. This underestimation increases by approximately 2-10 kg/ha with CMAQv5.3, with the largest increase occuring during the summer. The largest increases in bias in the summer occur in the Midwest and Great Lakes regions. In the fall, the largest increases in bias occur in the upper Midwest, Great Lakes and Northeast regions. Simulating with bi-directional NH<sub>3</sub> exchange (BiDi) turned on greatly improves the wet deposition NH<sub>4</sub> underestimation, particularly in the late spring through early fall. Bias in the summer is reduced by 25-35 kg/ha, while in the spring and fall the bias is reduced by 5-15 kg/ha. This represents a significant reduction in bias and large improvement in model performance for wet deposition NH<sub>4</sub>.
* **Summary**: Wet deposition SO<sub>4</sub> is generally higher with CMAQv5.3 (versus CMAQv5.2.1), particularly in the winter and spring, resulting in an improvement in the underestimation of wet deposition SO<sub>4</sub>. Wet deposition NO<sub>3</sub> is also higher with CMAQv5.3, resulting in an improvement in bias in the winter, spring, and late summer and slight increase in bias in the late summer and fall. Wet deposition NH<sub>4</sub> is generally lower with CMAQv5.3, particularly in the late spring through early fall, which results in increased bias, particularly in the summer. Invoking bi-directional NH<sub>3</sub> exchange greatly improves the underestimation in wet deposition NH<sub>4</sub> in the late spring through early fall.

<a id=additional_faq></a>
## Additional FAQ
A more general list of Frequent CMAQ Questions can be found on our website: https://www.epa.gov/cmaq/frequent-cmaq-questions

<a id=tech_support></a>
## Technical support for CMAQ
Technical support for CMAQ, including questions about model inputs, downloading, compiling, and running the model, 
and pre- and post-processing utilities, should be directed to the [CMAS Center User Forum](https://forum.cmascenter.org/). 
 [**Please read and follow these steps**](https://forum.cmascenter.org/t/please-read-before-posting/1321) prior to submitting new questions to the User Forum.
